one of the most sobering statistics that
i've seen in this whole epidemic is that
people under 65 years of age with
pre-existing conditions which are
virtually all lifestyle and diet driven
conditions are at as high of risk
for
hospitalization
as people who are over 65 with no
pre-existing conditions so if you're a
45 year old person with type 2 diabetes
you have the same risk of being
hospitalized as a 70 year old or a 75
year old that doesn't have any of those
pre-existing conditions and that if
that's not a wake-up call i don't know
what is
everybody welcome to health theory
today's guest is chris cresser he's a
best-selling author and functional
medicine practitioner who founded the
cresser institute which trains doctors
and health coaches in evolutionary
health practices he was named one of the
top 100 most influential people in
health and wellness by greatest.com
and he's become known far and wide for
his individualized non-dogmatic approach
to diet and lifestyle chris welcome to
the show my friend tom it's a pleasure
thanks for having me dude it's good to
have you man i'm excited about this so
i've obviously seen a ton of footage um
on you and the things you talk about
i'm somebody who is really fiendish
about health and wellness as it relates
to
just accomplishing what you want in life
so my last company was a nutrition
company and when i started the mindset
stuff people wanted to know why the
protein bar guy was talking about
mindset now that i'm full-time mindset
people like why am i talking about
health but to me they're they're just
inextricably connected
um
how would you define sort of your
overarching strategy when it comes to
um individualized
notions of of getting it right getting
it dialed in how do you think about
people approaching it
yeah
great question so
i mean it's certainly true that we share
a lot in common as human beings you know
we're the same species we have
the same general anatomy and physiology
but it's also true that we have a lot of
important differences we have
you know different genes different gene
expression different lifestyle different
goals different health statuses
we live in different climates and
environments and all of that can affect
what an optimal dietary approach is for
a given person and not only that
that will change over time with each
person so for example imagine someone
who is a you know high high-level
athlete in their late teens and
20s
that would require a certain dietary
approach but then in their 40s or 50s
they're a sedentary office worker
you know they're no longer performing at
a high level and and so that would be a
totally different uh
dietary need or situation or
somebody who uh develops a chronic
illness an autoimmune disease their
dietary needs would change versus what
they might have been before that illness
so
i think a lot of the public health
messages around diet
are oriented around trying to come up
with one
ideal approach for everybody and i think
that's doomed to fail
certainly we can extract certain
fundamental principles that apply to
everybody as a baseline
and then
using all of those characteristics that
i mentioned before to create the
ideal
uh approach for each individual okay so
before we dive into some of the
individual stuff which you said some
things in the intro like climate
um
that i actually haven't heard people
talk about before so i'll be really
interested to dive into that but first
let's talk about those fundamental
principles so you talk about food
quality
what what does that mean like how does
the average person i'm going to guess
you're going to say whole food but i'd
love to to really put a fine point on
what you mean by food quality and what
those general guidelines are
so um
let's kind of
first distinguish between food quantity
and food quality so
and look to answer this properly i have
to actually look a little bit
historically at dietary guidelines and
what the recommendations have centered
around has mostly been quantity quantity
of certain macronutrients like
carbohydrates or fat you know the low
fat guidelines for 50 years 40 years
american heart association
or
quantities of nutrients like how much
you know vitamins you should eat or
minerals you should eat uh or quantities
of specific foods like red meat or dairy
products or
you know saturated fats or trans fats
and
the problem with that approach is that
it's led to what food philosopher
gregory skrinis calls nutritionism which
is this kind of myopic focus on the
isolated components of food
rather than the overall quality of the
diet pattern so by overall quality
you're right we're speaking of
is this a real food is it something that
grows in the ground or lives in nature
or versus something
is in a bag or a box and it's highly
processed through the industrial food
system
is it nutrient dense so nutrient density
is a measure of the concentration of
nutrients in food relative to its
calories or
weight and we want to be focusing on
foods that are highly nutrient dense
that's a measure of quality in addition
to you know whether it's a real food or
a whole food so
if we focus on foods that are high
quality they're nutrient dense they're
whole foods they're anti-inflammatory
then
in most cases not all we can talk about
the specifics of that that's like 80 or
90 of the battle right there and then
the remaining 10 or 20 percent is just
tweet the the twisting of the dial
to get the optimal approach for each
person maybe a little more carbohydrate
or a little less carbohydrate or a
little more of this food little less of
that food excluding those foods
including those foods
but people tend to focus on that 10 or
20 percent and not enough on the 80 to
90 percent and certainly that's been
true of the dietary guidelines it's it
is really interesting to me what happens
in
uh food so food has become a new
religion so back at quest we created
what dude i cannot tell you there are
two times in my life where i created a
piece of content that i did not think
was controversial i thought people gonna
love it and they lost their minds one
was when i wrote an article called it's
all your fault looking back on that one
i get why people were triggered by it i
still agree i think i was right but i
get why that one's triggering for people
and then the other one was that we put
out a video that basically was like hey
a calorie is not a calorie right it
really matters where it comes from and
so the nutritional um
makeup of a twinkie is very different
than the nutritional makeup of a steak
or something else or even just match it
you know macronutrient to macronutrient
a carbohydrate from like a potato or
something like that so
and people lost their [__] dude it was
crazy you want to talk about something i
did not think was controversial
and people went bananas so
go a little bit deeper for me on
why do you think people get so dogmatic
about this why has this become the new
religion what do you think it is about
the human psyche that drives people to
be so [__] dogmatic about this stuff
yeah i like to look at it through the
ancestral revolutionary lands as i do
with diet and lifestyle factors i think
it's evolutionary biology and
evolutionary psychology can really help
us help shed light on some of these
behaviors that that are natural to
humans but don't seem that adaptive or
helpful at this point in our in our
evolutionary history um but humans are
essential you know
we're tribal animals and um
the
you know we it had to be that way like
in a natural environment we couldn't
survive
most of us probably very well for very
long if we weren't if we didn't have the
support of the tribe and so that means
we tend to strongly identify with a
certain group of people
and
because that makes us feel safe and if
we
if we feel like we're apart from that
tribe or we're excommunicated from that
tribe
then we we feel essentially the fear of
death and
we don't
you know consciously go around thinking
that way i think it really comes down to
like a basic survival instinct um where
i'm gonna i'm gonna throw my
you know
a lot in with this group and therefore
everybody else is other and it sets up
that that natural conflict
um but
diet is a is an area that um is pretty
universal it applies to everybody you
know we eat some of us two times a day
some three times a day some more
and the public health ramifications of
the diet
rec you know dietary advice and
that is given both by public health
officials and now by bloggers authors
and doctors and nutritionists and other
experts has pretty profound
ramifications you know for the health
our health not only individually but
also as a society so i think it's a big
deal
i think we're seeing the impacts of poor
dietary choices in our country and
elsewhere in the industrialized world
that are
literally threatening to bankrupt our
country
and as we've seen now with covid 19 that
are an issue of life and death you know
one of the most sobering statistics that
i've seen in this whole epidemic is that
people under 65 years of age with
pre-existing conditions which are
virtually all lifestyle and diet driven
conditions are at as high of risk
for
hospitalization
as people who are over 65 with no
pre-existing conditions so if you're a
45-year-old person with type 2 diabetes
you have the same risk of being
hospitalized as a 70 year old or a 75
year old that doesn't have any of those
pre-existing conditions and that if
that's not a wake-up call i don't know
what is yeah no joke how much have you
been paying attention to covid19 one of
the things that i'm i'm really intrigued
to learn more about is the
thai they're saying that being obese is
like a brutal factor in terms of
mortality rate with coca-19
which is scary but i don't understand
the mechanism i don't know if you know
much about it
well
yeah i paid close attention to covid19
uh i have seen articles about obesity
what's interesting is that in in the
studies that i've read that have looked
at the existence of pre-existing
conditions and their relationship with
both hospitalization and and death
obesity hasn't been quantified they've
looked yes they've looked at diabetes
and blood sugar
issues they looked at cardiovascular
disease they've looked at kid chronic
kidney disease they've looked at smoking
but they actually haven't characterized
obesity as one of those risk factors now
we know that many people who are obese
not everyone but many people who have
who are obese also have either
pre-diabetes or diabetes and
one of the theories right now this is
not proven there's a lot more research
that's needed
is that one of the pathological or
perhaps the main pathological mechanism
of covid
is that it interferes with oxygen
deliverability with hemoglobin's ability
to deliver oxygen to the cells
and this is one theory why ventilators
are not working as well as as they would
hope and may even be causing harm
uh you know very high percentage of
people who are ventilated end up dying
and they're on ventilators for a much
longer period of time than would
typically be expected is that the
ventilator can't necessarily move the
oxygen around that's the job of
hemoglobin and if there's
uh something that's causing hypoxia or
lack of oxygen then
then a ventilator in that situation
wouldn't necessarily help
um what i heard along those lines
something this is what you've heard as
well is that basically the ventilator is
working at a mechanical level for
somebody that has a traditional
pneumonia
you're just so fatigued you you almost
can't do the physical act of breathing
anymore and so the ventilator is going
to help that it's going to force your
lungs to move and for you to breathe but
if the problem is at a cellular level
and you're just not able to to shuttle
the oxygen essentially do the gas
exchange right that
um
it doesn't matter whether you're
usually breathing or not and the reason
that diabetes is problematic one reason
and one's a speculative mechanism here
is that uh in in diabetes hemoglobin
becomes glycated with sugar
it becomes so it's already problematic
exactly so the blood sugar levels are
high really fast let me interrupt you
there i'm super curious so are people
that are struggling with diabetes are
they already having a problem with
oxygen transport
yeah i think that's fair to say that
that's especially when you see the
levels of a1c get higher that that's
that's one of the issues with diabetes
so
you know we can also extend that to say
that anything that interferes with
oxygen deliverability including anemia
which hasn't yet been measured as a
contributing risk factor pre-existing
condition is important and this of
course takes us back to the
relevance of a nutrient-dense diet
because you know the most common cause
of anemia is iron deficiency anemia
which affects two billion people around
the world two billion people mostly in
developing and developing countries
but uh here in the u.s it's still a big
issue um
particularly among people who are
malnourished and are undernourished and
you know underserved communities and
then there are other causes of
nutritional anemia too like b12 and
folate deficiency a lot of drugs and
this is another double whammy effect
here a lot of people who have diabetes
take metformin
and metformin depletes folate and b12
levels which
can cause or contribute to a nutritional
anemia b12 macrocytic anemia so
i don't think we've even begun to get a
grasp on all of the different ways that
these mechanisms commingle
uh and interact with one another so do
they haven't quantified obesity yet um
they've obviously as you said looked at
several different things do you have a
rough order of like what are the most
terrifying underlying conditions i know
smoking is brutal because of the way
that it compromises the lungs um
is that the worst thing that you could
be doing is diabetes the worst thing
like what are the the most troubling
underlying factors have they sort of
rank them
different studies have found different
results diabetes seems to be at the top
of the list in most of the studies that
i've seen
which was actually surprising you know
given that this is a restless severe
respiratory illness i think
we would have thought that
people with you know pre-existing lung
conditions would rank at higher risk for
for complications but if this is if this
um theory about hypoxia cell at a
cellular level is true
and diabetes impairs oxygen
deliverability then that makes sense
right it's not just so much about
the lungs themselves but about the whole
body systemic response
to the illness
but certainly people with chronic lung
disease and and including asthma so some
of the younger people who have died um
from covid have been people with asthma
that were otherwise relatively healthy
they didn't necessarily have diabetes or
cardiovascular disease or anything else
they had and and they didn't even
necessarily have you know fully active
asthma like people who are
immunocompromised so
uh that can include people who've
undergone you know chemotherapy or
cancer treatment um you know immune
deficiencies uh prolonged use of
corticosteroid drugs like people with
autoimmune diseases who've been taking
prednisone or something like that for a
long time
chronic kidney disease which i mentioned
is another major risk factor and liver
disease even the cdc has said that
severe obesity with like people with a
bmi over 40 um
is a risk factor but i think it's likely
that it just you know
regular obesity obesity with a bmi less
than 40 could be a risk factor too
especially if it's showing up with
diabetes or pre-diabetes
so going back then to b12 b12 something
that i hear you talk about a lot i i
don't understand its role at all
i don't know what it does um
give me give me like a brief primer on
b12 and why it matters so much
yeah so um
b12 is a critical nutrient that's
involved in the
uh in a lot of stuff but uh in this
context that you're asking about
particularly in the maturation of red
blood cells
so
one way to think about it is like
red blood cells go through kind of like
a benjamin what was it benjamin button
yeah so where he starts out uh old and
gets younger over time so
red blood cells actually start out uh
large and then they get smaller over
time like when they're when red cells
red blood cells are born you know when
they're first produced they're large and
they get smaller over time and b12
is part of that process of maturation
and if there's not enough b12 in this in
the body then the red blood cells don't
develop normally they be they stay large
and they're shaped like an oval rather
than round like healthy blood cells
and then that causes the bone marrow to
make fewer red blood cells overall and
in some cases it causes premature death
of the red blood cells so then
uh since they carry hemoglobin and
hemoglobin what delivers oxygen then you
can develop what's called macrocytic
anemia
macro meaning large large cell anemia
which is differentiated
from iron deficiency anemia which is
microcytic which means small
small cell anemia so
um
b12 is is um mostly present in animal
foods true b12 um
and
so people who are vegetarian or vegan
are at higher risk of b12 deficiency if
they're not supplementing
but even people who eat an omnivorous
diet can develop b12 deficiency it's not
because they're vegan by choice but
they're just malnourished but
it's just it's encouraging that we're
starting to understand this a little bit
better because once you understand the
mechanisms better then the the doorway
for therapeutics whatever they may be is
is much more open than it is when you
don't really even know what you're
trying to accomplish with the
therapeutics well let's talk about some
prophylactics so obviously people can
supplement b12 what do you think about
cardio so i despise cardio
i really only do cardio when i'm really
trying to get lean but
legitimately about seven minutes ago i
thought the second this interview was
over i am going to a treadmill because
if this is around the ability to
um lung capacity red blood cells i'm
getting oxygen around exactly getting my
my cardio on point uh might be truly uh
something to really consider
i i agree a hundred percent uh i'm i'm
with you i don't i don't love cardio
i'll do it if it's in the context of
something that i enjoy doing
like
i like to surf i like to ski i'm not
doing any obviously either of those
right now um
i like to ride my bike i think really
anything that improves your blood flow
right now so even strength training
although it's not necessarily increasing
lung capacity it's probably increasing
blood flow which is a good
good thing to do right now
of course diet is critical always but
it's even more so now especially if
you're someone who's at risk for you
know higher blood sugar
the reality
at least from what i am reading and
seeing is is that this is
you know while the we might reach the
peak case a number of cases from this
initial wave in the next couple of weeks
code's not going anywhere anytime soon
and you know i wish that were not true
um
but it's this is likely going to be with
us in some capacity for you know 12 to
18 months and maybe even seasonally for
you know until there's an effective
vaccine developed so
what this means is that it's not just a
question of like what do you do
tomorrow or in the next couple of weeks
to prepare it's what do you do for the
next year or two and going forward to
reduce your
your risk and one of the most important
things for sure is to control your blood
sugar so if you're someone who's got
pre-diabetic or diabetic level blood
sugar
then you know taking action through diet
to lower that blood sugar considerably
and get it back into normal range i
would think is the probably one of the
biggest roi things you could do
so that could be a low-carb diet a keto
diet
um you know protein-sparing modified
fast there are a number of dietary
approaches that have been proven to be
effective for diabetes
but it also means strength training
getting enough sleep managing your
stress
uh all of these things are also really
important when it comes to lowering
blood sugar like just stress alone which
is hard to avoid right now
raises cortisol and what does cortisol
do what what's its main job in the body
is to raise blood sugar when it falls
too low
now
um that was an evolutionary mechanism
when we would go periods of time without
eating and our blood sugar would drop
cortisol would be there to keep it
stable but that backfires on us now when
if most people's blood sugar doesn't
ever fall too low and cortisol is just
raising it
to unhealthy levels so
those are you know i think sleep
physical activity exercise strength
training cardio
uh stress management which is even more
critical now than ever before and a a
diet that
specifically a diet that manages blood
sugar levels are probably the most
important things people can be doing
right now
great advice
so one thing i want to
follow up on is
one of the things that i
um
i
like most about your approach and the
conclusions that you've come to is that
it's based on being a clinician
um and one thing that i
i find drives me crazy about the current
state of the different nutritional
debates is look studies are important
and i i for sure 100 and i'm often very
moved moved to action in fact by studies
that i read so this is not me
downplaying studies this is me saying
that
there's so much individual variability
there's so much complexity that
of the study and the way the study is
constructed of humans and just nutrition
of biology that the idea that you're
going to get the full picture for
yourself from a single study is it's
basically zero so i have to imagine that
there are things that you just see like
ah [__] this is anecdotal i've had 10
patients but it worked for all 10 i have
a theory and i'm just going to roll with
that that to me is actually more
powerful it's more valuable when it's
working in the real world with
individual people whose lives have
turned around
than just the studies what are some
things that you see like just on a
day-to-day basis maybe you're not even
sure why it's working yet
but that you see in the trenches with
patients um that
is
interesting and that you're sort of
pushing out now to more and more
patients
yeah uh i i think one thing that i
that i'm i mean this isn't like a new
thing or anything novel but uh fasting
is very interesting to me as a lever
by by that i mean all different kinds of
fasting so intermittent fasting you know
time restricted eating alternate day
fasting longer periods of just water
fasting you know like
or or broth fasting
what is sometimes referred to as fat
fasting
where
you know somebody
mostly fast but might eat 200 or 400
calories of like coconut oil or
something like that so
to increase the ketogenic response of
the fast
in some cases yeah especially if it's
mct or coconut oil
because mct is ketogenic
uh
there's a saying in medicine that
fasting is a cure for all diseases
and if you look in the scientific
literature that's really true like there
are lots of conditions that will
um completely reverse during in a fasted
state so when they say that give me the
length of fats that they're talking
about so are we talking a five-day water
only yeah they're usually talking about
like you know three to seven day fast
and what you can sometimes see in those
situations is like pretty severe
autoimmune diseases will
like almost completely reverse in some
cases during that fasted period the
symptoms really almost completely go
away
the problem is that fasting is also the
cure for life
if you do if you do it for too long
right so um
i you know but i think that this is a
an underexplored area certainly in
conventional medicine it's definitely
like in my world lots of people are
exploring it and lots of people are
doing it but i've seen um
really powerful and significant changes
um
in people who are doing intermittent
fasting and more extended fasting
perhaps as much or more than just about
any other intervention so
i'm really exploring that a lot more
you've probably heard of carnivore
diet and like this increasing interest
in people who are just eating meat and
animal products and nothing else
i have a theory that's just a theory
it's not confirmed
um that the reason so many people
feel better this
people who have like severe autoimmune
diseases are going into remission and
stuff like that is that it essentially
works in a in a similar way that fasting
works on the gut
where
when you fast there's no new input
that's
feeding any bacteria in your gut and if
you have a lot of pathogenic bacteria
and microbes in your gut they're going
to start to die
because the substrate that they need to
survive is no longer there
and
meat and animal products get digested
pretty high up in the small intestine
and don't generally reach the large
intestine not to the extent that you
know fibers and vegetables and plant
foods
do
and so i think a carnivore
approach may be kind of mimicking some
of the benefits of fasting but allowing
people to sustain that for
you know perhaps indefinitely why is it
that pathogenic um
bacteria or fungi or whatever why is it
that there aren't pathogenic bugs that
are fed through
meat
uh it's just the case that that uh
carbohydrates particularly you know
complex carbohydrates that uh
are
linger are not absorbed high up in the
intestine are the primary substrate the
thing that most
bacteria like
and like to metabolize there's something
interesting in there and i don't know
what it is so this is obviously one of
the things that we've explored with my
wife um which was when she was really
struggling we basically she was eating
beef
period full stop and that was when she
had sort of the biggest
leap she hated her life she didn't like
eating like that at all it was
absolutely miserable for her from an
emotional eating standpoint um but it
was the only thing that reduced her
symptoms walk us through what you see as
like the evolutionary landscape and how
much it matters
meaning like my wife is
from a genetic standpoint from the
mediterranean
i am from uh northern europe so
does that is that relevant or are we
just talking hominids
uh yeah all great questions and you know
if we look at the study of human diet
you know anthropologically we see lots
of evidence that humans have
uh for the you know as as far back as we
can see
have eaten some combination of plant and
animal foods now that
the exact proportion of plant versus
animal foods will vary from population
to population sometimes it's skewed more
heavily towards animal foods probably
most times if if you if you look at it
as a percentage of calories
and then sometimes it's more heavily
skewed towards plant foods and going
back to the question you asked early on
about climate
the percentage of plants versus animals
that human populations ate was pretty
strongly related to where they were
relative to the equator
so
populations that were closer to the
equator tended to have a relatively
higher percentage of plant foods that
they consumed in their diet versus
animal foods and populations that were
further from the equator tended to have
the opposite so
i think that all matters you know
climate
geography
and then um in terms of genes
i do think genes probably play some role
uh so one example would be lactase
persistence so lactase is the enzyme
that breaks down lactose which is the
sugar and milk
and historically as hunter gathers we
didn't produce lactase into adulthood we
only produced it while we were
breastfeeding and as soon as you know
after that was finished we didn't keep
producing lactase because humans didn't
consume milk at that point but
about 11 or 12 000 years ago there was a
random genetic mutation that allowed uh
humans to start digesting you know keep
producing lactase into adulthood and
digest lactose and
that adaptation was selected for meaning
it conferred a survival advantage
because milk and dairy products were a
good source of calories and a good
source of hydration especially during
times of famine so that
mutation
spread around the world but it spread
unevenly
so it was very prevalent in the middle
east where it first started
and then it became prevalent in certain
areas of africa and most particularly
northern europe so up to like 95
or 97 of scandinavians for example have
lactase persistence this ability to
digest lactose into adulthood whereas
only about 30
to 33 percent of people worldwide have
it so it's actually more common than not
for people to not be able to digest
lactose around the world if you look at
the world globally
but for someone with scandinavian
heritage it's almost certain that they
can digest milk into adulthood
so the you know on the genetics there's
also other you know there there are um
uh other genes like there's one that um
may predict our response to starches so
um amy1 is a salivary amylase gene
that is correlated uh with
uh you know people who come from
populations that historically had a high
starch intake have higher levels of this
gene and it may suggest that they might
do better with higher starch intake than
someone that comes from a population
that has a lower intake
so those are just two examples there are
many more but i think genes do play some
role on what determines the optimal
individual approach so if somebody like
my wife for instance who again is
mediterranean so if she's trying to
rebuild her um
her digestion uh the whole microbiome
the
microbiome microbiome like the the whole
shebang is it just like oh the standard
mediterranean diet like that that's
exactly what applies or
um
how do you sort of group people are
there
a nearly infinite number of groupings or
do they sort of fall into five different
camps what does that look like
yeah i i think although genes do play a
role i think people's um like current
health status and
um
existence or non-existence of um
you know certain conditions can play a
bigger role so let me
use an example you know let's say
someone has significant gut issues
that are caused by sibo
which is bacterial overgrowth in the
small intestine basically bacteria in
the place where it shouldn't be and then
that bacteria is fermenting
carbohydrates in a small intestine that
ferment you know when bacteria
metabolize carbohydrates they produce
either hydrogen or methane gas maybe
hydrogen sulfide
as well
those gases
can kind of wreak havoc in the intestine
and it can also that condition can
interfere with nutrient absorption it
can
cause a low-grade inflammation etc so if
that condition is present even if
genetically speaking that person might
thrive on a more mediterranean type of
diet
they're probably not going to do well
eating certain things that are prevalent
in that diet like legumes or grains
or you know or certain types of
carbohydrates that are difficult to
digest and break down because
of that condition so in other words that
condition is sort of interfering with
what a normal genetic response might be
to a set of foods
so what does that experimentation
protocol look like so you've got things
like the whole30 you know elimination
diet
how do you get people who are struggling
um do you have just sort of a general
protocol for
people to go through
it starts with testing i'm a big
believer in tests don't guess so at our
clinic we have a whole case review
process that includes a lot of different
testing so it's a very comprehensive
blood panel so much more in depth than
what you would typically get at a you
know your through your primary care
doctor we're looking for
blood sugar of course
metabolic function we're looking at like
comprehensive metabolic panels so that
includes like the liver amino
transferases ast alt ggt
bilirubin we're looking at some of the
kidney function markers phosphorus
potassium
uh
creatinine and egfr
um
of course the blood sugar markers lipid
status and then we're looking at all the
hormones nutrient status uh immune
markers but then we're doing extensive
gut testing so we're doing a stool test
and that's to look for undetected
parasites which are actually more common
than most people might believe
fungal overgrowth
which until recently was sort of
pooh-poohed in the conventional medical
world but there's now been several
studies correlating fungal overgrowth
with ibd inflammatory bowel diseases
like crohn's and ibs
and and then we sometimes will do a
urine organic acids panel which looks at
some
byproducts of of normal metabolic
processes and also bacterial metabolism
that give us insight into what's
happening in the gut and then we might
do
we also will typically do a test of for
the hpa axis looking at stress hormone
production like cortisol dhea
and depending on the patient we might
add a few other tests
because that's then what allows us to
answer the question that you're asking
where do you even start how do you know
which diet which approach is going to be
best in that case and there's kind of a
rough way that i sometimes break it down
when i'm talking to patients or when on
training other clinicians so
there's
one group of people which is the
majority that the largest group of
people whose conditions
are primarily diet lifestyle and
behavior driven and can be primarily or
almost or exclusively addressed just by
modifying those factors without ever
seeing a doctor so
you take the sort of average american
who's eating
you know too much highly processed and
refined food is sedentary
is not sleeping enough and is you know
overwhelmed with stress
you know they might end up with diabetes
pre-diabetes obesity irritable bowel
syndrome etc
but i could have that person just work
with our health coach and nutritionist
and if they were able to
follow the guidance being given and
stick with it
i would say
in many of those cases 80 or more of
their symptoms would go away and they
would basically be back to normal
then you have another
uh category of patient which is mostly
who i work with just because this is my
background of suffering from a complex
chronic disease and it's the kind of
patient that i attract
is patients with complex chronic illness
and
many of my patients for example
are
extremely educated about diet they're
following not only a
you know whole foods diet they're
following some very advanced variation
of that you know like a ketogenic diet
or an autoimmune paleo protocol or low
fodmap diet or something like that
they're doing they're sleeping or at
least they're trying to they're
you know they're doing doing everything
right and they're still sick
and those people will often require
functional medicine kind of approach
where they get the testing and then they
get more advanced treatment
and it's harder for them to just do that
on their own they're already doing all
the right diet and lifestyle behavior
things and they're still sick so that's
like the the most meaningful distinction
in what i see yeah that makes cause that
has implications
in terms of
how do we design public health
interventions
if most of the people are in that former
category
then it's not about like more doctors or
more medicine it's about
more support for people making these
critical diet lifestyle behavior changes
so this is where like health coaches can
i think make a huge impact on
the future of health care and on
preventing and reversing disease because
most disease is diet and lifestyle
driven all right so give me the ultimate
diet and lifestyle if i want to live
amazing i want to feel good longevity
high energy
what what does my diet my lifestyle and
supplementation if that's a component
what does that look like
well
i would say you know all the fundamental
principles we've talked about for sure
um
the you know nutrient dense whole foods
anti-inflammatory diet that's tailored
for you based on your health status and
also your activity levels so
for example if you're extremely active
doing a lot of highly glycolytic
activities like mixed martial arts or
crossfit or something like that you're
probably going to need more
carbohydrates if you're not doing those
things and you're trying to lower your
blood sugar
and deal with
you know weight gain or insulin
resistance then probably lower
carbohydrate intake would work
and then we've got you know seven eight
hours of sleep a night
physical activity again that has to be
tailored to you based on what your goals
are and what's happening for you
stress management and then i would add a
few other things that i think are really
critical and often overlooked so one is
social connection and
this is difficult now for us right
during covid19 and i think all people
are feeling the lack of that of it in a
way that they may have never
fully realized
lack of social connection in study one
study was shown to be a greater risk
factor for early death than smoking 15
cigarettes a day
one of one of the most mind-blowing
studies i've ever seen but humans are
social animals and when we lack social
connection it has very real measurable
effects not just on our emotional and
psychological well-being but on our
physical health
um and then another is spending time
outdoors which again if you look at it
through the ancestral lens that's
something that we we lived outdoors 24 7
for most of our evolutionary history and
being outdoors it's it relaxes us it
reduces stress
uh sunlight produces vitamin d it
increases nitric oxide which increases
blood flow
and it it has a regulatory effect on the
immune system
so there's so many
benefits to being outdoors
and then lastly
cultivating more pleasure
so
people often raise their eyebrows when i
when i say that because they think wait
we live in this hedonistic society
that's totally devoted to pleasure how
can you say that i would disagree with
that i think our our society is
dedicated to distraction
um which is different than pleasure
pleasure is a is an experience that's
felt in the whole body when you're fully
present and aware of what's going on
there's the release of endorphins
happening during pleasure give me some
of the most pleasurable joyful things
that you do
uh
so uh surfing is definitely
uh pleasurable
massage is great
you know touch is one of the things that
can do that the most
both for me and for everybody else
sex dancing
you know really kind of
fully
joyful experiences listening to music
brings a lot of pleasure
um all of that's important because it
produces chemicals that we um need
actually to to thrive and live well so
that's that's my prescription that's
pretty good i dig it um i think you're
right i don't think a lot of people talk
about joy it's an interesting
distinction between distraction and
pleasure
uh that's very interesting in fact i
know you've meditated for a long ass
time um yeah where where do you put that
in the everyone should try yeah
i don't think i would be here if i if i
hadn't had that my meditation practice
it's just gotten me through so many
challenging periods of my life and
enabled me to function and thrive in
situations where i i think i would have
otherwise fallen apart but
for me meditation is really about
increasing our awareness our ability to
observe
what's happening internally our
sensations our thoughts our feelings and
what's happening externally
without
uh getting
being becoming totally reactive to those
internal external stimuli so it's it's
about cultivating the witness
perspective ability being able to
witness what's going on and then make a
conscious choice about how we're going
to respond rather than just a knee-jerk
reaction and that's useful in any area
of our life whether we're in an intimate
relationship and we're having a
conversation or an argument with our
partner
or whether
we're in an extremely threatening and
even life-threatening situation you know
uh or with lots of fear and uncertainty
and loss of control as we are with
covid19
that ability to stay present take one
moment at a time is really critical i
think to our survival and
and thriving in even in difficult
circumstances
well said if people want to find out
more about you
all the things that you teach and offer
where should they go
chris cresser.com is my main website
lots of free ebooks there link to my
podcasts and lots of articles and then
for my training programs the health
coach training program i mentioned and
we also have a 12-month functional
medicine training program for doctors
and other clinicians those are at
cresserinstitute.com awesome man dude
thank you so much this is fun i love
your even keel approach i love that
you're not dogmatic i love that your
thinking evolves um it's yeah it's
incredible thank you so much for
spending time with us today
yeah thanks for having me on i really
appreciate it and enjoy the conversation
well hopefully this will be the first of
uh many to come in the future i will
certainly be keeping an eye on
everything that you put out i've loved
this so far so thank you man look
forward to it thanks take care all right
everybody if you haven't already be sure
to subscribe and until next time my
friends be legendary take care
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe
you're going to get weekly videos on
building a growth mindset cultivating
grit and unlocking your full potential